Um, we are going live.
Um, thank you for joining us,
and we are gonna jump straight into our first, uh,
submission from, uh, the National Delegate Team.
It says at Department of Conservation,
but I assume it's for the department Co or,
or this is the PSA team from the Department of Conservation.
Have we got that right? Excellent.
Well, we have got 10 minutes for you.
Um, I'll let you know when there's a minute
to run, but the time's all yours.
Thank you. Um, so perhaps if I can start
by explaining the National Delegate Team.
Um, so the PSA is
basically the only union now operating in doc.
Um, although we do, I think still have a couple of old guys
who belong to a Ones our membership,
which is the majority of staff elect local delegates,
it's local delegates, then the national delegates
who form the national Delegate team.
And our NDC meets once a month.
And at the moment, because we have a lot
of restructurings on,
we meet more regularly and share information.
The National delegate team, uh, has a formal
high performance engagement relationship with management
because fundamentally, our goals are much the same
as the department's goals.
We want our members
to be working in a highly productive workplace
where they are safe and they have high wellbeing.
So increasingly we end doc work together,
but this is very much a submission from the delegates.
The delegates look at the business from
a slightly different lens.
Um, and, and this is our contribution to the debate.
So in our work, one of the things
that's obviously very important to people when they join DOC
is the fact that they're joining
a business which has very long term goals
and has to run long-term programs.
And our members want to be able
to be part of programs that run seamlessly
with continuous improvement in how well they can operate.
So there's been a lot of improvement in our ability
to do offshore island eradications, pest control operations,
manage these, work with our volunteers,
all of that sort of stuff.
And so we are a bit concerned that the changes to
the legislation, which are proposed in this bill,
will remove some of that focus on that long, long-term
program, long-term stewardship role
that operational government agencies need to have.
Ministers don't have the time or,
or the interest, I imagine
to be involved in every day-to-day thing that we have to do.
They expect most of the business to just keep running
and to keep running well and to constantly improve.
And they use legislative changes, policy changes,
and the estimates to steer the ship, not
to run everything about the ship.
And, and so we are concerned that that balance between
the day-to-day goals of the government
and that long-term public service role for the public is,
is not well balanced if the changes
that are proposed here are made.
So that's fundamentally our concern
in terms of the diversity.
We strongly support, um, appointment by Merit.
That's what we see largely happening in the public service.
Um, but we also want diverse teams
because diversity brings a range of ways
of approaching jobs.
If you want to constantly innovate, you have
to have some diversity.
So again, we'd be reluctant to see references
to diversity lost from the legislation.
We looked closely at the bill and at the core legislation,
and we couldn't see that the diversity words
were in any way a barrier to merit appointments
and those other principles, which are very clear.
So that's our submission. Thank you. Thank you. Um,
Francisco Hernandez, uh, thank you so much.
She, thank you so much for, um, your submission.
Um, I do wanna pick up that point around, uh, you know,
merit based appointments in the public service
and also what you had to say around the diversity
of thought thing because, you know,
the minister herself has acknowledged that, um,
she hasn't seen any evidence
that there's no merit based appoint, that there's a lack
of merit based appointment in the public service.
Could you elaborate on what you said?
Uh, how on your submission where you wrote
how managers were, uh, recruiting people
who are like them in the way they look
and would approach the work
and not appointing similarly qualified people
who would approach the job differently?
It's a general problem with humans. Oh, yes.
You know, so particularly if you use an interview process.
So a whole lot of people walk into the interview
and if they have quite similar
basic skill sets, so they're all quite pointable.
But, but for example, let, let me give an example, um, of
the appointment of an operations manager
during a restructuring some time back where
a woman from who had been working at the national level
wanted to be considered for the job, um, and was not,
and in my view, that was partly
because the recruiting manager had a very
specific picture in his head of
what an ops manager looks like.
And an ops manager, you know, is somebody
who used to do fencing.
It's not somebody who worked in policy
and then in, in national issues management.
So, so to me, what I was seeing was very much that lens of
I have a vision of lots sort of person we want,
and it's based on what we've had in the past,
and it's based on what I am
because I'm what we had in the past.
Um, and,
and so we often end up
with difficulties getting shifts in our workforce
because of that, that constant maintenance
of the same kind of workforce.
And, and so we want to see workforce planning
that actually thinks about that
and thinks about what kind of people we need in future.
Um, and just one question from me.
You just in your first part, and you,
and you go into quite some detail in your submission,
but just about the long term sort of work that Dr
and I think of EY Island where, where I come from, um,
a a great result, right?
Fantastic work that you do out there.
What, what specifically would you do you think needs
to change that would
otherwise, if it goes through as the bill is written now,
you won't be able to sort of do that?
I am not entirely sure that we wouldn't be able to do
that, but it removes the emphasis on that.
And I think very much when the Public Service Commission
is giving advice to Chief Executives is advising on
how the overall public service system works,
that they won't be prodded to think about that
and to think about what
what they are doing might impede that kind of program.
And, you know, if you think capi, I mean CAPI was set up
as a nature reserve in 1895, if I remember rightly,
or 75, you know, a long, long time ago.
And, and it has been a very long process
to get it to where it is today.
Mm-hmm. And, you know, we want the Public Service Commission
actively thinking about that in thinking about
how the public service needs to be set up, how they manage
equipment processes for chief executives,
how they manage chief executives. Can I,
Can I just ask a specific one just on your
recommendation to, to do with this?
I apologize for interrupting, but I'm just That's all right.
We've only got a minute left.
Um, it, it says that you want
to retain the provision in section 11 in relation
to supporting, you know, the long-term interest.
But in this bill that provision is retained.
It just adds a second section
after about the chief executive.
I, I, I just wonder, is there a, so,
so we actually are keeping that section clause 11.
I'm not sure if that addresses your concern
or is it adding the specific chief,
chief executive stuff that's an issue.
It's adding the specific chief executive stuff.
So it's, it's, what does the chief executive focus on that
that is our major concern, I guess,
Right? How,
how do, do you know how they manage it now?
'cause at the moment it doesn't say
that the chief executive should manage
it, focus on this either.
I, I used to be the person
who managed the chief executives relationship
with the State Services Commission,
but that was a long time ago before this act.
Okay. Um, and in those days
what we had were KPIs and Oh yeah.
And the chief executive was judged about
how well they had progressed,
and there was a conversation about the KPIs.
Now, if that's the sort of thing that they're still doing,
you know, that type of approach, what we want is to be sure
that the Public Service Commission
is having a lot of KPIs that are about
that stewardship role about
is the department gradually getting a stronger department
and more able to deliver for the government of the day
as opposed to simply delivering
for the government of the day.
Thank you. And so, yeah, so that's our concern is
how the chief executive, I,
I appreciate that clarification.
Thanks. Thanks for humoring me.
We are actually out of our time there.
But thank you very much, um, for joining us today
and joining us in person.
We appreciate it. We are now gonna move online, I believe,
to the policy hub at Vicki Uni.
Um, welcome. We've got until eight 20 for your submission.
Um, you might like to leave some time
for questions. It's all yours.
Thank you very much, chair
and members of the committee for the
opportunity to appear today.
Because of the short amount of time you've written out the,
what I wanna say in five minutes
to give opportunity for questions.
So please forgive me not giving eye contact to you
as I go through this.
I want to begin by saying I fully support the attention
being given to legislation that underpins the roles,
responsibilities, and the ways
of working of our public service.
My comments today focus on one specific aspect of the bill,
the role of the public service in long-term
thinking and stewardship.
At present, the act recognizes
that public servants should ensure advice is
provided on the long-term implications of policies,
not just immediate costs and benefits.
The bill removes that recognition
that may look like a small drafting change,
but it has large consequences.
Why does this matter? It's easy to list some of the issues
that will profoundly shape New Zealand's future.
Artificial intelligence is already changing, uh, the way
that we, uh, the nature of work and many aspects of society.
The aging of our population will require a different shape
of our health and care systems,
and will have implications for who is working
and how we afford the society we want.
The changing world order is raising questions of security
and the future of democracy itself.
And climate change will bring a range of challenges,
and together these different forces will deliver a very
different future for us.
These are not short term issues.
They demand careful consideration
and consistency over decades, not a seesawing
of shifting priorities every few years.
If we want to leave a stable
and fair legacy for our mouna, we have to design our system
to balance the urgent with the longer term challenges
to think about tomorrow and not just today.
The challenge is that the political imperative in
democracies is to focus on the present
and the term of government.
Former Prime Minister Jeffrey Palmer once said,
the very structure of government decision making is geared
to meet the needs of the present, not the future.
We need to build in a system that pays attention
to the longer term challenges.
To balance this, under the current act,
chief executives are required
to provide advice on long-term implications
of policy decisions.
Clause 27 of the Bill repeals that requirement
from my own experience,
which was 30 years in the public sector,
including 10 years in senior policy roles
and 25 years working internationally on
foresight and future governance.
I can tell you this, if long-term thinking is not clearly
required, it will not happen.
Clause 45 removes the obligation of every department
to produce long-term insight briefings instead just one a
year by the Department of the Prime Minister
and Cabinet, I reviewed the first round of L tibs.
They showed real promise.
There were 19 briefings, some detailed analysis,
some genuine pieces of foresight,
and together they created a valuable picture of challenges
and opportunities ahead for New Zealand.
However, I wouldn't recommend keeping what we have.
Um, it was inefficient.
It would be more efficient to start
by doing a national horizon scan.
Second, I do agree that there should be fewer L tibs not 19,
maybe three or four per term.
Third, there needs to be dedicated expertise.
You wouldn't go to the dentist
and have a dentist remove a tooth the first time they've
ever done the tooth.
You want people with experience if they're looking at the
future challenges and opportunities for New Zealand.
And fourth, I would change it.
So there's early engagement with ministers.
My experience in foresight shows that
unless you have the people with the power to act
involved in foresight work,
you'll just have a nice pretty piece
of information at the end.
So we need to have engagement with ministers early on.
The bill's proposal for DPMC
to produce a central briefing aligns
with the first step but not the rest.
So I'd like to offer three
recommendations to strengthen the bill.
First, reinstate the expectation
that departmental chief executives must ensure advice is
provided on the long-term implications of policies.
That clause isn't symbolic.
It's a statement that stewardship of the future is a core
public service duty.
Second, build on the DPMC re briefing by requiring three
or four additional departmental l tibs
to focus on key cross-cutting government issues
that allows us to keep a good eye on future opportunities
and challenges while using resources wisely.
And third, embed foresight capability in that work,
because long-term thinking that's good requires skill,
structure and practice.
In conclusion, the Public Service Act should not only
support good policy today, it should safeguard the ability
of the public service to look
beyond the political cycle cycle to successive governments.
So success, sorry.
So successive governments make wise enduring decisions.
Removing the explicit recognition of
that role would be a backward step reinstating.
It would send a clear message that the stewardship
of New Zealand's future is not optional.
It is part of what it means to serve the public. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Uh,
I'll just see who's got questions around the table.
No, they don't appear to be any, um, very grateful
for your time and for your very, um, thorough
and well set out written submission as well.
We appreciate you joining us this morning.
Um, we are gonna move on in the room. I think we have Dr.
Malcolm Menzies. Thank you.
Come and take a seat please. Thank
You.
Um, and there is five minutes set aside
for your submission, so I'll just leave you to it,
but I'll let you know when there's a minute or so to run.
Uh, Tina, thank you for this opportunity.
Uh, I think I'm gonna follow up theme of long-term thinking
and, um, uh, a lot of what I have to say resonates
with Andrew Jackson just said, but,
but I have a slight difference of, of approach and emphasis.
Um, the main point I want to make in my old submission is
that the public service bill provides almost the last chance
to retain a recognized government-wide futures thinking
capability in R Tower or New Zealand.
Our country lags far behind others, including Australia,
Singapore, Wales, Canada, Finland, the European Union,
and the OECD, who have highly developed capabilities
and strategic foresight.
We have a history of failed attempts
to embed futures thinking, going all the way back
to the National Development Conferences of the 1960s,
the Commission for the Future in the 1980s
and the Knowledge Wave Conference in 2001.
The previous long-term insights
briefings were set up to fail.
And Andrew Jackson, Jonathan Boston
and I wrote an article, uh, assessing that the ltip,
which you may have or may not have seen, um,
although many of the briefings were of high quality,
and the people who produced them deserved praise,
the briefings involved much duplication of work
and inevitably produced a fragmented picture of
what the future might hold.
There were 1919, uh, long-term insights briefings, uh,
but only three were debated in parliament.
That debate was both gratifying
and disappointing, gratifying, and that it was held at all.
Not so long ago to wish
for such a futures oriented debate in Parliament would've
been completely fanciful.
A few mps made a decent attempt to discuss long,
long-term intergenerational issues.
I thought Andy Foster was on this committee.
He was one of the, the people who showed some, um, uh,
intergenerational thinking,
but there were no ministers present in the house,
which was less than 20% full.
I watched in pretty much splendid isolation from the gallery
before I was shooed out in preparation for made speech.
It could hardly be said that the Al Alter process attracted
a lot of political public attention.
That's the end thing, uh, vast half full.
I'm relieved that the long-term insights briefing concept
has been retained in the proposed amendments to the act,
and there is room for improvement.
And my, my take on this is that in particular, the L tib
needs to be given more prominence and more heft.
I know from experience of managing a triannual review
of retirement income policies,
that three years comes around too soon.
That's just one specific policy area.
People ask, haven't we just done this?
Um, it would be better
to produce a solid long-term insights briefing every five
years to reflect the breadth and depth of the work required.
A five year cycle would also disconnect the briefings from
political manage management and manipulation.
I'm not naive though,
and I understand that governments will not want to have,
have their feet held to the fire over an ltip.
The ltip will need to be pitched at a very high level,
and its power will come
through its transparency in the promotion
of debate about options for building resilience.
The purpose of futures thinking is not
to predict the future, but to identify key trends
and uncertainties and probable possible
and preferred futures
and their implications for the present so that strategies,
policies, and plans can be made for more made,
more anticipatory acceptable, adaptable
and robust in the future that eventually emerges.
To that end, it makes no sense to issue an alt unless public
and private sector organizations consider
how they will respond in their planning.
This response need not be mandated,
but it should be encouraged.
In my written submission,
I've suggested some wordings for consideration.
There should also be a dedicated independent foresight
futures, uh, unit within the DPMC, uh,
to support the chief executive preparing each altar.
I dream of the 2030 altar being the subject of a substantial
and serious futures debate in a full House
of Representatives led off by the Prime Minister
before a packed gallery.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, we've just got time for one.
We've got about 30 seconds. Francisco.
Uh, thank you so much, Sharon.
Thank you for your submission.
Um, just curious why the DPMC as opposed
to something like the PSC?
The PSC? Uh, well, it's a good question.
I mean, it's just, it's what's in the act, so go with that.
Okay. There needs to be some central agency. Yeah. Yeah.
And DPMC does have a track record.
It's, uh, it produced, uh, resources
to support the Al Tips futures.
They've got a very good website, actually.
It's good resources on it,
so they've got some history. Okay. Yeah.
Well, thank you, um, very much for joining us.
We, we appreciate your time
and your, um, also the, just the suggested change
of wording is very specific, which is helpful.
Thank you. Um, we're gonna move back online
for our next submitter from appearance
of Vision Impaired New Zealand.
Are they? Yep. They're New Zealand.
We just give them a minute to turn on their camera.
And good morning, Dr. Graham.
We have got, um, 10 minutes for your group.
I'll let you know when there's a minute to run.
Um, otherwise, the time is all yours.
Oh, your, thank you so much for having us here today.
Um, uh, you would've read, uh, written submission,
and we just wanted to highlight a few things in our oral
submission about the bill.
Uh, while we appreciate the intent of the bill, particularly
around efficiency, stability,
and accountability, which are all important things
with the public service, uh,
are organizations deeply concerned that several
of the proposed changes, uh, risk undermining, inclusion,
equity, and accessibility for disabled people
and their families, uh, or in particular efficiency
and accountability are important.
Uh, but when they come at the expense of participation,
inclusion and fairness, they end up not being particularly
efficient at all.
Uh, the bill removes explicit references to diversity,
equity, and inclusion from the Public Service Act.
Uh, we acknowledge
that these ideas appear in other legislation.
Um, however, removing them from the centrality
of the Public Service Act does send a powerful signal,
which is that inclusion of disabled people is optional,
not essential, uh, for families like the ones we represent.
This sends a signal that disability issues are easily
sidelined and that their children have no
place in the public service.
It also reduces the visibility of accessibility needs
and requirements, reduces the visibility
of things like reasonable accommodations
and results in a less inclusive practice across
government agencies and their ministries.
A truly effective public service is one
that serves its population,
and that must include disabled children For our families,
our disabled children will grow up and become adults.
And so we obviously take a very long-term thinking approach.
And it's really important to be able
to see visibility now at this stage so
that our parents can see a future for their children
as they grow into adulthood.
Uh, we recognize that public resources must be used wisely,
but when the type of efficiency
that is prioritized is a very narrowly defined
monetary only focus, this means that disabled children
and their families and disabled adults end up losing
out tailored supports.
Accessible systems
and reasonable accommodations are not always able
to be delivered as cheaply
or as quickly as for non-disabled people.
When performance is framed solely
around a limited understanding of efficiency,
this risks cutting the very supports that enable widespread
participation, independence,
and contributions by disabled people and their families.
This approach runs counter
to New Zealand's obligations under the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
This convention requires that governments take active steps
to include, not exclude disabled people from public life.
The changes in this bill risk, uh,
actively excluding disabled people from
participating in public life.
I also want to draw the committee's attention
to the employment outcome
and the Refresh New Zealand disability strategy.
Uh, at the time of submission, the strategy wasn't out yet,
so I didn't include it so much in our mission submission.
But one of the core outcomes
of the New Zealand disability strategy is employment.
Uh, and the goal is
that disabled people will have meaningful career
opportunities equal to non-disabled people
and be valued the same way
disability Confident employers will recognize disabled
people's talents and provide accessible
and inclusive workplaces throughout
the employment lifecycle.
The disability strategy then lays out practical actions
to achieve this, such as improving pathways into employment,
building employer confidence,
supporting accessible workplaces,
and promoting awareness of the value that disabled people
as employees bring the proposed legislation
undermines actively undermines this outcome
of the New Zealand disability strategy.
Uh, the actions outlined on the disability strategy do
depend somewhat on a public service that leads by example,
one that models inclusion of disabled people in recruitment
and career development
and in workplace accessibility, a public service
that understands what reasonable accommodations look like in
practice and what is required to promote and include
and make these an ordinary part of the service
by removing explicit commitments to equity and inclusion.
This bill undermines the employment goals stated in the
strategy and narrowly efficiency focused public service
will not invest in the time flexibility,
or reasonable accommodations that are required to recruit
and retain disabled staff
or to ensure accessible workplaces and digital systems.
Thus, risk reversing progress towards the strategies vision
of a non disabling society.
And it directly conflicts with the state of goal
that disabled people will have meaningful career
opportunities equal to non-disabled people For our families.
Seeing disabled people employed in the public service gives
them a hope and a vision that their child, while born blind,
does not have limited opportunities in life.
That there are places for them to work
and to live independently.
And this gives them an ability to engage
with the necessary services in the early intervention
to make that long-term goal happen.
Uh, the bill expands the powers of T six executives
to delegate functions to contracted employees.
This shift risks weakening accountability
for accessibility and inclusion.
When services are outsourced, it is our families
who end up facing inconsistency in quality,
inconsistent accessibility, and inconsistent responsiveness.
It becomes increasingly harder to identify
who is responsible for a particular piece
or, uh, service.
And this makes it easier
for obligations towards disabled people, disabled children,
and their families to fall through the cracks
if contractors are not held to the same accessibility
and inclusion standards as the public service itself.
Again, it's our families, our disabled children,
and disabled New Zealanders who are disadvantages.
Similarly, while we welcome the Bill's emphasis on digital
leadership, and we are big fans of accessible technology
without mandatory accessibility standards
and universal design, digital systems continue
to exclude our families.
We've really noticed that,
that if accessibility isn't mandatory, people drop it off.
Uh, public service must ensure
that every New Zealand citizen can independently access
information forms and online services.
We've had to fight so hard already for a number of these
to be accessible for our children.
Uh, we are concerned
that this changes in the school will drive those, uh,
changes backwards over the long term.
Finally, amendments related to emergency
and continuity planning could help improve protections
for disabled people, but only if disability inclusion
is made explicit.
We have seen repeatedly in emergencies
that when planning doesn't include disabled perspectives,
uh, access to essential information, evacuation
and supports is compromised.
This occurred in Christchurch where nobody knew
who the blind and low vision persons are,
and they weren't included when they needed to be evacuated.
Mm-hmm. Uh, in closing, um, we would like to see
that any changes to the public service, uh,
strengthen New Zealand's commitment to disabled people,
to accessibility, uh,
and that our families will be able
to rely on a public service that understands
and meets their needs, not one
that sidelines them in the name of efficiency.
A truly efficient and effective public service is one
that enables every person, including those with disabilities
to participate fully in education,
employment, and community life.
Thank you. And for our last minute, we've got,
um, question from Laman. Lydia Sini.
Um, thank you for your submission.
Really helpful to, um, clearly understand the effects, um,
should the legislation go through.
I have, my question is around the, um,
equity inclusion and participation.
You've highlighted a number of, um, if things are reversed
and it's current form, can you just, um, really speak
to the disability inclusion
and so important in terms of not just children,
but all the way to the workforce, why it's really critical
that that part of,
or a big part of our community needs to be, um,
included in the public service?
Sure. So first off, it's a human right.
So that's a really big reason.
Like it is a basic human right, um, under the U-N-C-R-P-D
for disabled people to be included equitably
and similarly to non-disabled.
Um, secondly, uh, disabled people exist.
Uh, we are a huge part of the community.
The latest figures have one in six on New Zealanders having
some form of disability.
Now, obviously, the level of that, uh, ability varies,
but, uh, if you're thinking about one in six New Zealanders,
you need to have disability perspectives
to understand what is required.
Um, for us, blindness
and low vision is a really particular disability,
and if you don't understand what's required in terms
of inclusion and access for that disability,
you are not going to be able to meet it.
So it's super important that you are talking to people
who understand what does accessibility look
like for a blind person?
What are the things that we need to implement at this level?
What is an accessible document?
If we put a document up online
and a blind person can't access it
and read it, that's a huge problem.
So you need people in the public service who are able to do
that for you, with you,
and ensure that in terms of the public facing, that people
who are public facing who are disabled can
access that material. Um,
Thank you. We are, um,
sadly, um,
a bit over time there, but we
appreciate it. We're gonna move on. I
Could've gone on and on, I'm sure.
Uh, next online submission is the a Asian Legal Network.
I think we have Darren joining us. Welcome.
We've got, uh, a 10 minutes set aside for you.
Um, and I'll let you know when
there's a minute to go. It's all yours.
Kiara, Tim, uh, Kiara.
So we're Darren, uh, sine and Darren.
So submitting on behalf of the Asian Legal Network,
so an organization of lawyers, former judges, academics,
and community advocates,
and we strongly oppose the Public Service Amendment bill.
So we take our written submission as read,
and today we focus on three critical points, the repeal
of diversity and inclusion provisions, the removal
of pay equity protections
that disproportionately affect Asian women,
and the deletion of references to long-term public interest
and active citizenship from the acts purpose.
So first on diversity
and inclusion, one of the key drivers for removing inclusion
and diversity is the focus,
or is this focus on merit based appointments.
So we believe it's a little bit offensive to suggest
that meritocracy and diversity are somehow opposed,
as if diverse candidates lack merit.
Uh, we believe there's categorically false meritocracy has
demonstrably failed
to achieve diversity in our public service.
So, DEI may not be perfect solution,
but it is an essential policy tool addressing substantial
bias and lack of representation.
Second, diversity simply makes better policy.
So if our public service reflects our communities,
we get better insights,
better consultation, and better outcomes.
Diverse teams, we believe build trust in democratic
institutions that we do see as weakening.
And third representation creates ripples.
So when people in our communities see themselves in public
service, it facilitates civic engagement, creates belonging,
and yet this bill removes the very language about
facilitating active citizenship
that enables this participation.
You cannot achieve the outcomes we expect from public
service without diversity as part of the framework.
Therefore, we urge you to reject this bill.
So we recommend you remove Clause 35,
which removes the requirement on chief executives
and boards to promote diversity
and inclusiveness amongst other provisions
that roll back diversity down.
On the second point, on pay equity
and removal of bias, we are quite concerned, uh,
with the removal of the good employer provisions, um,
under section, uh, 73, uh, three, um,
subsections INJ,
those provisions require the chief executives
to include considering, um, pay equity
between female male employees, as well as the importance
of remuneration to be free, uh, from bias,
not limited to gender bias.
These provisions are important for our communities.
We have recently submitted to the, uh,
people's Select Committee on Pay Equity.
What we would, what we found in our, in our research is
that Asian women get, are disproportionately affected
by the ethnic gender wage gap.
Uh, it is one of the few ethnic gender wage
gaps that are actually increasing.
Uh, currently the gender wage gap sits at 14.6% on average,
7.6% for women, but up to 24.2% for Asian women,
and 33% in, um, different in various sectors,
including the academic health sector.
We think that these statistics are very shocking,
and the public service should be taking the lead in
addressing pay equity.
It has flow on effects by viewing, um,
increasing things like representation,
trust in the public service, and it,
and it supports mutually supports the points that, um,
sine has made about diversity and inclusion more generally.
It is an open secret
that the public service doesn't reflect, um,
and doesn't represent all of our communities at present.
It, um, doesn't do very well in terms
of representation at the leadership level.
And things like pay equity are some of the barriers.
It's not a perfect solution,
but we think that just on fairness, public, uh,
or just on fairness, pay equity is important,
and more importantly, it disproportionately affects, uh,
w in our community.
And so we think that the removal of references
to pay equity, particularly in the good employer, uh,
provisions, are deeply concerning.
And we urge this committee not to recommend, um,
these provisions, uh, to continue.
We also wanna make a short comment
on the purpose of the bill.
Interestingly, the current purpose, uh,
already states the importance
of the long term public interest to be considered,
and also that it is on the government to support
and facilitate active citizenship.
Find it quite curious that the amended purpose
does not make reference to these, um,
two points in particular, long term public, um,
interest in active citizenship as well as a, a turn instead
to a focus on, quote unquote meet the
needs of New Zealanders.
At present, we think that the long term view
that the current purpose states is in the benefit
of Asian communities,
and particularly the focus on active ci, active citizenship.
The long-term view is important
because we know that AL is changing,
it's changing demographically.
There are, uh, changes on the horizon, um,
that the public interest needs to consider
and to take into account.
And we think that this purpose in which it frames the whole
act is something that, that, um, shouldn't be removed.
We also know that active citizenship is particularly
important, uh, for Asian communities.
We've just recently made, uh, our own submission on the, um,
electoral amendment bill, and we have, we made concern.
We, we set out our concerns there about
how Asian communities have been historically and con
and contemporarily, um, excluded,
or that there are barriers
to engaging in the democratic process, active citizenship,
and facilitating, facilitating that should be part of
what the public service does.
We think that there are long term benefits to this, such
as strengthening democracy in a time like 2025 when we see
that trust in democratic institutions are rolling
backwards globally.
When we step back, all these three, three points
that we've highlighted, inclusion and diversity, pay equity,
and more broadly in terms of the purpose, uh, we don't think
that that reflects what the public service
should be heading towards.
And in fact, it doesn't set up alor well to, um,
address future concerns.
Before we continue and,
and wrap up, I just wanted to turn over to the committee
and to engage any questions
that, uh, the committee has for us.
Yeah, I'll start with, uh, Francisco Hernandez.
Uh, thank you so much for that chair,
and thank you for your submission, uh, Asian legal Network.
Um, can you elaborate on how having, um,
DEI could actually enhance merit based appointments rather
than going against it?
Uh, yeah. So for example, uh, say for example in,
we'll take counsel, so real local, uh, example.
So we had a park, um, that was up for consultation,
and the people who were there with the clipboards weren't,
uh, were just standing there not able to actually engage
with the people who were utilizing the park, who, you know,
maybe from a different, um, ethnicity
and simply didn't understand that there are different ways
that you have to go up to them.
You can't expect people to go to you.
And until I pulled them by the scruff of their shirts
and said, please talk to the people
who are utilizing this park, that consultation
and the outcomes, the genuine outcomes
of consultation would've never happened.
So it just shows that when it comes to diversity,
engagement in community, um,
and engagement of public services, that's
where DEI comes in.
Uh, we've just got sort of two minutes left.
Um, did you wanna speak more about the long-term, um,
vision, or do you want a question on that now?
Uh, any questions? Well, I'll welcome on that.
Yeah. If you had any questions.
Yeah. So I, I'm just interested in the, um,
you're not the only submitter that's talked about the long
term focus.
I'm, I'm just, you know, wondering how it compares, say,
if we look at the Australian legislation, it doesn't mention
that it's just kind of, um, I, I guess assume
that everyone's takes more than an immediate focus.
But, um, do you have other countries
where you think this maybe that we could compare it to
where it works really well?
We don't have that with us specifically in terms
of other comparable jurisdictions
that have specifically talked about the long-term interest
in the public sector, um, analysis.
However, signaling at a, at a proposed level,
we think is always important.
Um, it's not so much that it's, it's, um,
not present, but it's actually being removed.
That is the issue. And
what the signals when we're interpreting, um,
legislation going forward, the removal
of a focus from the long-term interest
and the replacement, we think that that might create, um,
unintended legal consequences.
And those are things that we need to consider.
We also don't see the justification for its removal,
which is why we're,
we're concerned from our community's point of view.
And probably this is, is this is the key point.
We should be really focused on the long term
because of the challenges that RO faces.
And we think the public service is well positioned
to be explicitly considering the long term.
Um, and it's not just the long term,
but it's long term in relationship
to things like active citizenship.
When we look at the global trends towards backsliding in
democratic participation, that is a call for concern.
So it's that removal in 2025 when we're taking a
look at the global trends.
That is the reason why we're concerned whether it's removal
from, um, a significant piece of legislation like this.
Thank you. Um, and that does actually,
Stanley, bring us to the end of our time.
We have our next submitter in the room.
Thank you for joining us today.
We are going to move now to the clerk of the house, uh,
or the office of the clerk, um, clerk,
the house representing them.
Uh, we've got 10 minutes set aside for your submission.
You might like to leave some time for
questions. Uh, the floor is
Yours. Okay. Thanks Mr.
Chairman and good morning members.
So the submission is a fairly brief one
and really just focuses on one issue, um, around Clause 25,
uh, sorry, clause 45 of the Public Service Amendment bill.
Um, so which is, which deals with the way
that long-term insights
briefings will be prepared in the future.
So under the Public Service Act,
now all departmental chief executives are required
to prepare long-term insights briefings.
Um, and there's been one round of those that's enabled, um,
you know, parliament to engage quite deeply on longer term
thinking, which is something that, um, has been felt
to be absent in the past.
Um, the, and this committee plays a coordinating role in
the, um, handling of long term insights briefings
when they're presented to the house.
At the moment, it's the Governance
and Administration Committee that allocates them
to subject select committees in the last round,
which is the only one we've had.
Um, all committees bar one received one of those briefings.
The commentary on them was, you know, they're
of mixed quality and, and usefulness,
but overall, I think this committee,
and it's in the last Parliament, felt they were useful, um,
and did think there should probably be some more
coordination and, um, I guess evening out of,
of their quality and coverage.
The, uh, the bill that's in front of the committee proposes
that only the Department of Prime Minister
and Cabinet will prepare a long-term
insight briefing in the future.
Um, and I raise that
because it def directly affects parliament's ability
to scrutinize the performance of the government
and of public service departments.
Mm-hmm. Um, at the moment, uh, there's one
of these briefings per department,
they're allocated to committees.
As I said, almost all committees get one,
there's quite good alignment between, um,
subject select committees, subject areas,
and, um, government departments, areas of responsibility.
And that's an intentional feature of the way
that parliamentary committees have been established.
So I guess the concern is that it reduces the ability
of committees as a whole to carry out some of
that long-term scrutiny and
to scrutinize government performance.
Um, but on the other hand, I, I do take the point from the,
uh, the briefing papers
and the regulatory impact statement on this around the need
for better coordination and,
and leadership of it by the DPMC.
And so what, uh, I'm suggesting in the submission is
that we try and preserve the parliamentary scrutiny
by requiring an overarching report from DPMC,
retain the obligation for departmental chief executives
to prepare them for their own subject areas.
But, um, em empower the DPMC
to coordinate the process better.
This would maintain the accountability focus, the sort
of future or the need for future focus in departments
and maintain parliament's ability to,
to scrutinize the government and hold it to account.
So that's, that's the only thing
that the submission's on is just that amendment to Clause 45
to preserve some of that long-term focus that exists now.
And if there are any questions, I'm happy to take them.
Thank you. I'll look,
I'll just ask a really honest question
'cause I, um, I mean, it's, it's interesting
to me, like it almost feels like you are making a,
a policy recommendation in terms of how this could be run.
And, and I just, I I, I've noticed that, you know, the, the,
the officer of the clerks,
some has submitted on a few bills.
Mm. At the same time, we are being told in terms of,
you know, and this one particularly around scrutiny,
um, as it's set out.
At the same time, we're being told
that committees can't be supported
with more fulsome reports when they actually conduct
scrutiny in terms of annual reviews and estimates
because of time.
And yet, I I I guess some of us sit here
and go, well, the, the office has got time to
make commentary on, on bills and policy recommendations.
Yep. Could that not be dedicated to the, you know,
to helping actual scrutiny?
Okay. Well, uh, I'd say,
I guess there's two things to say about that.
That the clerk of the house has always commented on
bills that affect Parliament.
Um, and I think the amount of resource that takes is a,
a pretty small fraction of the amount that's needed
to support select committees.
So it would be effectively the time that I
and part of one staff member could give
to support committee scrutiny.
I think there is a, a balance to be achieved.
I certainly would like to be able
to provide greater support to committees.
And I hope that with the passage of the Parliament Bill,
we'll be able to, um,
but I think we'd be missing an opportunity if, um,
I didn't carry up my role, um, in, in commenting on,
on legislation that affects parliament.
And, and I understand that.
I guess I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm thinking out loud here,
but, um, I understand that where it comes
to maybe the actual workings of parliament, but,
but this is more, feels like that, you know,
a policy decision, which up until 2020 didn't happen
and we seem to cope, okay, uh, they've only been run once.
There's a policy decision taken by the government of the day
that says, actually we are not gonna proceed with them.
A as you said yourself, uh, they were pretty mixed reviews.
Um, and,
and we, there's a, we think maybe
the government suggests there's better things they
could focus their efforts on.
Uh, then just the, yeah, creating multiple reports.
I, I think the question is more, we,
we are getting into sort of a policy decision rather than a
working of parliament.
Um, well, I think it's a policy decision
that affects the working of parliament.
It's, it's meaning that something
that committees currently can work on,
they won't be able to in the future.
So I do stay away from government policy
that doesn't affect parliament.
I only co think I comment only on things that do,
and I really see that this does,
because it does remove one
of the work streams from committees.
But I mean, doesn't every policy decision impact the work
that comes to committees?
But this one is taking away a specific piece
of work from committees.
Yes. All, I mean, all, all policy that is enacted
through legislation affects
some committee in some way or another.
They have to look at the bill as you are doing now.
Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Um, I think that's true,
but we are, a policy means
that committees will no longer be able
to do something they can currently do.
That's why I felt it was necessary to highlight
It. But does this,
and I guess as I sort of think
through this issue, does this actually stop the committee
having a long-term view in terms
of local government for this committee?
Perhaps, uh, when we conduct scrutiny, um,
when we're looking at briefings
or inquiries when we have departments
before us, um, nothing says that it can't happen.
It's just going to be one centralized report coordinator
by DPMC rather than every chief executive being made
accountable for one.
Um, yes, that's right. Does
that actually stop the committees doing what they did prior
to 2020 when these didn't come in this form?
Uh, it, it doesn't, I, I think what happened prior
to 2020 was, I guess a feeling there wasn't
that much long-term focus.
Um, I, I think that's what led to these,
although it wasn't involved in the policy development
because it's a, as you know, a government policy.
Um, nothing stops committees looking
at anything they want to.
All I'm highlighting is that, um, a report that would come
to each committee that actually focuses on those areas in
their subject area will no longer be available.
And I, I think there's a way of achieving
what the government wants to,
but also something that's still useful for parliament.
So a bit more sort of spoon fed.
Uh, well only to the extent that all advice to committees,
if you sort of think of that as spoon feeding, I suppose
that, you know, that is a way of looking at it,
but you are all busy people
with a lot of things to deal with.
I would've thought getting advice that was specific
to it was more useful, um,
but ultimately as a decision you'll have to make.
Yeah. Um, Francisco Hernandez, uh,
Thank you so much, uh, chair
and thank you for, um, giving your viewpoint on this.
I think in terms of reducing, um,
I think the primary objection you have is that the, um,
that the committees will no longer get the specific reports
that are produced by the department
and that that will have the impact
of somewhat slightly reducing parliamentary scrutiny.
Yes. And you see the way that
that could be addressed is through better coordination
through the DPMC, perhaps,
and maybe a little bit more focused targeting
of the reports in some way.
Yeah, I, I think, I mean, there's certainly, you know, I,
I think the, the feedback on those
reports was that they were not perfect.
They were a work in progress
and that first round had variable results,
but overall was better than not having them.
Mm-hmm. Um, so I do think there's sort
of a middle ground trying to achieve
what the government wants to in better coordination of it.
But I, I still think there is a useful role
for departments in feeding into committees, uh,
to individual subject committees
on it through this committee.
Thank you. Thank you for your time this morning.
We are going to suspend when we are back at one o'clock,
we'll be as the whole committee down the corridor
and then we'll return to subcommittee later on.
Thank you. Thank you.